>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 3:
PRESIDENT OBAMA IN CHINA, AS THE
WORLD'S TWO LARGEST ECONOMIES
COMMIT TO A CLIMATE CHANGE
ACCORD; DONALD TRUMP IN
MICHIGAN, CAMPAIGNING FOR
AFRICAN-AMERICAN VOTES; AND IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE
HEALTH EFFECTS OF CALIFORNIA'S
DROUGHT.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE UNITED STATES AND CHINA
TODAY FORMALLY RATIFIED A
CLIMATE-CHANGE AGREEMENT THAT
CAME FROM THE U.N. CLIMATE
CONFERENCE IN PARIS LAST
DECEMBER.
IT HAS ALREADY BEEN ADOPTED BY
MORE THAN 175 COUNTRIES.
IN A CEREMONY TODAY AHEAD OF THE
"GROUP OF 20" ECONOMIC SUMMIT IN
HANGZHOU, CHINA, PRESIDENT OBAMA
AND CHINA'S PRESIDENT XI JINPING
COMMITTED THE WORLD'S TWO
BIGGEST ECONOMIES TO A COURSE OF
REDUCING THE CARBON DIOXIDE
EMISSIONS THAT CAUSE GLOBAL
WARMING.
COMBINED, THE TWO NATIONS
GENERATE ALMOST 40% OF THE
WORLD'S EMISSIONS.
ACCORDING TO THE TERMS OF THE
CLIMATE PACT, WHEN NATIONS
RESPONSIBLE FOR A TOTAL OF
55% OF GLOBAL CARBON EMISSIONS
RATIFY IT, THE PACT WILL COME
INTO FORCE, POSSIBLY BY THE END
OF THIS YEAR.
UNDER THE PACT, CHINA HAS AGREED
TO STOP ITS RISE OF CARBON
EMISSIONS BY 2030, AND THE U.S.
PLEDGED TO REDUCE EMISSIONS BY
AT LEAST 26% BY THEN.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAILED THE DEAL.
>> THIS IS THE SINGLE BEST
CHANCE THAT WE HAVE TO DEAL
WITH A PROBLEM THAT COULD END UP
TRANSFORMING THIS PLANET IN A
WAY THAT MAKES IT VERY DIFFICULT
FOR US TO DEAL WITH ALL THE
OTHER CHALLENGES THAT WE MAY
FACE.
>> Sreenivasan: EARLIER, IN
WELCOMING REMARKS TO THE G-20
LEADERS, PRESIDENT XI STRESSED
THE IMPORTANCE OF COOPERATION.
>> (translated): ALL COUNTRIES
SHOULD WORK TOGETHER TO
SAFEGUARD THE PEACEFUL AND
STABLE INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT.
IT HAS BEEN PROVED OVER AND OVER
AGAIN IN HISTORY THAT THERE'S NO
DEVELOPMENT WITHOUT PEACE, AND
THERE'S NO PROSPERITY WITHOUT
STABILITY.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME CONTENTIOUS
ISSUES ARE ALSO ON THE AGENDA.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID HE AND
PRESIDENT XI WOULD ALSO DISCUSS
HUMAN RIGHTS, HACKING, AND
SECURITY DISPUTES IN THE SOUTH
CHINA SEA.
THE G-20 SUMMIT IS THE LAST
SCHEDULED ASIA TRIP OF THE OBAMA
PRESIDENCY.
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE
DONALD TRUMP IS TRYING TO
IMPROVE HIS STANDING WITH
AFRICAN AMERICAN VOTERS.
TODAY IN DETROIT, TRUMP TOLD THE
CONGREGATION AT GREAT FAITH
MINISTRIES HE WANTS TO HELP
REBUILD THE CITY, WHICH HAS HIGH
UNEMPLOYMENT AND POVERTY RATES,
AND A POPULATION THAT'S MORE
THAN 80% BLACK.
HE SAID THE NATION NEEDS A
"CIVIL RIGHTS AGENDA FOR OUR
TIME" THAT PROVIDES BETTER JOBS
AND EDUCATION.
HE ALSO CALLED THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN FAITH COMMUNITY ONE OF
GOD'S GREATEST GIFTS TO AMERICA.
>> AMERICA HAS BEEN LIFTED OUT
OF MANY OF ITS MOST DIFFICULT
HOURS THROUGH THE MIRACLE OF
FAITH.
NOW, IN THESE HARD TIMES FOR OUR
COUNTRY, LET US TURN AGAIN TO
OUR CHRISTIAN HERITAGE TO LIFT
UP THE SOUL OF OUR NATION.
>> Sreenivasan: BEFORE THE
EVENT, TRUMP WAS GREETED BY
PROTESTERS OUTSIDE THE CHURCH.
NATIONAL POLLS HAVE SHOWN HIS
SUPPORT AMONG BLACK VOTERS TO BE
IN THE SINGLE DIGITS.
DEMOCRATIC NOMINEE HILLARY
CLINTON HAS NO PUBLIC EVENTS
SCHEDULED THIS WEEKEND.
HURRICANE HERMINE HAS WEAKENED
TO A TROPICAL STORM AND IS
MOVING NORTH ALONG THE ATLANTIC
COAST, DRENCHING AREAS FROM
GEORGIA TO THE CAROLINAS.
HERMINE WAS THE FIRST HURRICANE
TO HAVE MADE LANDFALL IN FLORIDA
IN MORE THAN A DECADE, CAUSING
WIDESPREAD POWER OUTAGES AND
HEAVY FLOODING YESTERDAY.
GOVERNOR RICK SCOTT SAID 300,000
FLORIDA HOMES WERE WITHOUT
ELECTRICITY TODAY.
THE STORM IS BLAMED FOR TWO
DEATHS.
FORECASTERS PREDICT HERMINE
COULD DOUSE EASTERN STATES WITH
UP TO 15 INCHES OF RAIN,
DISRUPTING LABOR DAY HOLIDAY
WEEKEND TRAVEL PLANS.
THE NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER
SAID TODAY "THIS IS NOT A BEACH
WEEKEND" FOR ANYONE IN THE MID-
ATLANTIC TO THE NORTHEAST.
HERMINE IS THE FOURTH NAMED
STORM OF THE 2016 ATLANTIC
HURRICANE SEASON.
PEOPLE IN THE GREAT PLAINS WERE
SHAKEN AWAKE THIS MORNING BY THE
STRONGEST EARTHQUAKE IN THE
REGION IN YEARS.
THE U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY SAYS
THE 5.6 MAGNITUDE QUAKE WAS
CENTERED IN NORTH CENTRAL
OKLAHOMA, NEAR PAWNEE, A TOWN OF
ABOUT 2,200 PEOPLE.
THE QUAKE WAS FELT FOR HUNDREDS
OF MILES AROUND, IN SIX
NEIGHBORING STATES.
PAWNEE'S MAYOR SAYS THE QUAKE
LASTED AT LEAST A MINUTE, MUCH
LONGER THAN MOST TREMORS THAT
HIT THE EARTHQUAKE-PRONE STATE.
IT WAS OKLAHOMA'S STRONGEST
EARTHQUAKE IN FIVE YEARS, BUT
OFFICIALS REPORT NO MAJOR
PROPERTY DAMAGE AND ONLY ONE
MINOR INJURY.
WHILE CREWS WERE OUT TODAY
CHECKING ROADS, BRIDGES, AND
BUILDINGS, THE STATE AGENCY THAT
REGULATES OIL AND GAS DRILLING
ORDERED 35 PRODUCTION FACILITIES
WITHIN 500 MILES OF THE
EPICENTER TO STOP INJECTING
WASTEWATER INTO THE GROUND.
GEOLOGISTS SAY THOSE WASTEWATER
WELLS ARE LINKED TO THE STATE'S
INCREASED SEISMIC ACTIVITY.
OKLAHOMA SAW MORE THAN 900
MAGNITUDE 3.0 OR GREATER
EARTHQUAKES LAST YEAR, BUT THAT
NUMBER HAS GONE DOWN THIS YEAR
SINCE NEW WASTEWATER
RESTRICTIONS WERE IMPOSED.
SEE THE VIVID LIGHT ART
INSTALLATION AT A SACRED SHINTO
SITE IN KYOTO, JAPAN.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY, TURKEY
AGAIN DEPLOYED TANKS INSIDE
SYRIA TO TARGET POSITIONS HELD
BY ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS.
20 TURKISH TANKS BACKED BY
ARTILLERY ENTERED NORTHERN
SYRIA ABOUT 35 MILES FROM WHERE
TURKISH FORCES FIRST CROSSED
INTO THE COUNTRY TEN DAYS AGO.
TURKEY SAYS ITS MILITARY HAS NO
PLANS TO STAY IN SYRIA BUT AIMS
TO PROTECT ITS BORDER FROM ISIS
AND SEPARATIST KURDISH MILITIAS.
THE INCURSION COMES ON THE EVE
OF A BILATERAL MEETING BETWEEN
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND TURKEY'S
PRESIDENT, RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN,
ON THE SIDELINES OF THE G-20
SUMMIT IN CHINA.
I AM JOINED NOW BY TURKEY'S
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER, NUMAN
KURTULMUS, WHO IS ON A U.S.
VISIT AND IS IN CHICAGO.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FIRST OF ALL, THERE'S GOING TO
BE A BILATERAL MEETING ON THE
SIDELINES OF THE G-20 BETWEEN
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND PRESIDENT
ERDOGAN.
WHAT ARE YOU EXPECTING FROM THIS
MEETING?
>> WE EXPECT IT WILL BE VERY
POSITIVE CONVERSATION BETWEEN
TWO PRESIDENTS.
SO, ESPECIALLY, WILL FOCUS ON
BILATERAL RELATIONS WITH TURKEY
AND THE UNITED STATES, AND,
ALSO, THE COMMON INTEREST OF
BOTH COUNTRIES, AND THE MIDDLE
EASTERN REGION, ESPECIALLY IN
FIGHTING WITH THE TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION, INCLUDING I.S.
AND P.K.P.
OUR EXPECTATION THIS MEETING
WILL HAVE POSITIVE EFFECTS ON
THE FUTURE OF TURKISH-AMERICAN
RELATIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: WILL YOUR
PRESIDENT BE ASKING OUR
PRESIDENT TO BE EXTRADITING
FETHULLAH GULEN?
>> WELL, OF COURSE, OUR
INTENTION IS VERY CLEAR THAT
FETHULLAH GULEN IS THE LEADER OF
THE TERRORIST GROUP WHO TRIED TO
MAKE A COUP D'ETAT ATTEMPT THE
15th OF JULY IN TURKEY.
IT WAS A BLOODY ATTEMPT, UNFAIR
COUP D'ETAT ATTEMPT.
SO HE HAS LINKS WITH THE GROUP
WHO INTENDED TO CHANGE
DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED
GOVERNMENT AND THE PRESIDENT OF
TURKEY.
SO OUR MAJOR EXPECTATION IS TO
ACCELERATE GULEN TO TURKEY OR TO
DETAIN HIM HERE UNTIL THE COURT
WILL ANSWER HERE IN THE UNITED
STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: YOUR
GOVERNMENT HAS SENT MULTIPLE
DOSSIERS TO THE U.S.
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITIES.
THE U.S. CITIZENS DON'T KNOW
WHAT IT IS.
WHAT'S THE EVIDENCE YOU HAVE
THAT CONNECTS GULEN TO THE
FAILED COUP ATTEMPT?
WHY DO YOU THINK HE DID IT AND
ORCHESTRATED IT?
>> IT IS A GROUP OF PEOPLE WHO
HAVE A VERY CLEAR CONNECTION TO
GULEN, AND THE GULENIST GROUP IN
GENERAL.
THERE ARE SO MANY MILITARY
PERSONNEL ON THE FILE.
THEY HAVE CLEAR CONNECTIONS WITH
GULEN AND THE MOMENT OF HIMSELF.
>> Sreenivasan: DOES TURKEY
THINK THAT THE UNITED STATES
PLAYED A PART IN THE COUP
ATTEMPT?
>> NO, ACTUALLY, IT IS NOT OUR
OFFICIAL VIEW.
SOME PEOPLE ON THE NEWSPAPER,
TURKISH NEWSPAPER, MADE SUCH A
KIND OF DECISIONS, BUT IT IS NOT
OUR OFFICIAL VIEW.
WE STILL CONTINUE HAVING A GOOD
RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED
STATES, SO WE DON'T SEE ANY
CLEAR EVIDENCE THAT SOME OF THE
AUTHORITIES OF THE UNITED STATES
ARE BEHIND THE COUP D'ETAT IN
TURKEY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRESIDENT
HAS CALLED FETHULLAH GULEN'S
INFLUENCE A VIRUS, AND AFTER THE
COUP THE GOVERNMENT HAS HAD A
VERY, VERY STRONG CRACKDOWN.
YOU HAVE FIRED SOME 80,000 CIVIL
SERVANT, THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE,
INCLUDING JUDGES AND PROSECUTORS
HAVE BEEN JAILED.
SO MANY PEOPLE HAVE BEEN JAILED
THAT YOU HAD TO MAKE ROOM FOR
THEM RELEASING SOME OF THE
CRIMINALS.
AND YOU HAD A CRACKDOWN ON THE
MEDIA.
HOW DO YOU KNOW THAT ALL OF
THESE PEOPLE ARE GUILTY IF THEY
HAVEN'T HAD TRIALS?
>> NO, NOT ALL OF THESE PEOPLE
ARE GUILTY.
THEY ARE UNDER INVESTIGATION.
THE INVESTIGATIONS ARE STILL
GOING ON.
SO ACTUALLY, IT IS A VERY HUGE
CONFLICT BETWEEN THE TURKISH
STATE AND THE GROUP OF GULENIST
MOVEMENT.
SO THEY HIDE THEMSELVES DURING
THE LAST 40 YEARS INSIDE THE
STATE HIERARCHY.
THEY ARE STRATEGICALLY IMPORTANT
POSITION, AND THE CIVIL
SERVICES.
SO WE HAVE TO CLEAN UP OUR STATE
SERVICES FROM THOSE PEOPLE WHO
ARE CRIMINALS OR THEY HELP THE
CRIMINAL PEOPLE IN CREATING A
COUP D'ETAT ATTEMPT IN 15th
OF JULY.
SO THOSE FILES ARE UNDER
INVESTIGATIONS.
WE FOUND NONE OF THE PEOPLE
GUILTY YET.
BUT THE COURT CASES ARE STILL
GOING ON, AND, ALSO,
INVESTIGATIONS FOR THE PUBLIC
SERVANTS ARE STILL CONTINUING.
SO WE WILL WAIT AND SEE THE END
OF THE-- THE RESULT OF THE
CASES, EVERY INDIVIDUAL CASES,
AFTER THE EVALUATION BY LEGAL
AUTHORITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
THINGS THE TURKISH GOVERNMENT
HAS BEEN INTERESTED IN JUST IN
THE PAST MONTH HAS BEEN TRYING
TO REINSTATE THE DEATH PENALTY,
AND THAT'S SOMETHING THE
EUROPEAN UNION SAYS IS A RED
LINE.
SO WHICH WOULD TURKEY PREFER,
THE DEATH PENALTY OR MEMBERSHIP
INTO THE E.U.?
>> WELL, ACTUALLY, IT IS NOT
OFFICIAL CASE.
NOW, PEOPLE DEMAND-- IN THE
MARCH AGAINST THE COUP D'ETAT
ATTEMPT.
THEY ARE DEMANDING THAT PENALTY,
BUT IT IS NOT ON THE AGENDA OF
THE EXISTENT DEMOCRATICALLY
ELECTED GOVERNMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, LET
ME ASK YOU A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
THE KURDS.
I DON'T CLAIM TO KNOW ALL ABOUT
KURDISH POLITICS, BUT THE TOP
PRIORITY FOR THE UNITED STATES
IN SYRIA IS TO FIGHT THE ISLAMIC
STATE.
IN THAT FIGHT, THE U.S. HAS
KURDISH FORCES AS ALLIES THAT WE
ARE ARMING IN THAT FIGHT.
THE DAY THAT VICE PRESIDENT
BIDEN CAME TO TURKEY TO MEET
WITH YOUR PRESIDENT, TURKISH
TANKS WENT INTO SYRIA, AND THEY
ATTACKED KURDISH TROOPS THAT THE
U.S. SUPPORTS.
SO IF YOU'RE AN ENEMY OF OUR
ALLY, ARE YOU OUR ALLY?
>> WELL, ACTUALLY, THIS IS NOT A
KURDISH GROUP, WE HAVE TO MAKE
CORRECT.
THIS IS A GROUP OF TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS NAMED P.Y.D., OR
Y.P.G.
SO WE ARE NOT AGAINST THE KURDS
IN THE NORTHERN PART OF THE
SYRIAN TERRITORY.
SO THE KURDS ARE THE NATIVE
PEOPLE OF THOSE-- THIS REGION,
AND ALSO IN THE MEANTIME, THE
TURKSMEN ARE THE ORIGINAL PEOPLE
OF THE REGION.
OUR OPPOSITION IS THAT WE ARE
AGAINST HAVING A ONE-PARTY
REGION IN THE NORTH INSIDE-- THE
NORTHERN TERRITORIES OF SYRIA.
SO THAT'S WHY IF Y.P.G., OR
P.Y.D., MAKES IT MORE THAN 911
KILOMETERS TERRITORY, AS P.Y.D.
TERRITORY, IT IS NOT ACCEPTABLE
FROM TURKEY.
SO WE ARE OKAY FOR THE EXISTENCE
OF THE KURDS IN THE REGION.
BUT ALL OTHER PEOPLE, KURDS AND
OTHERS, MUST LEAVE THERE FOR
LONG.
SO WE ARE AGAINST THE TERRORIST
ACTIVITIES OF P.Y.D.
AS YOU KNOW, P.Y.D. ALSO HAS
VERY STRONG CONNECTIONS WITH
P.K.K., WHICH IS A CLEAR
TERRORIST ORGANIZATION, AND ALSO
P.K.K. IS ACCEPTED BY THE
WESTERN COUNTRIES AS ONE OF THE
MAJOR TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS IN
THE REGION.
SO TURKEY IS FIGHTING WITH
P.K.K..
P.Y.D., AND Y.P.G., ARE
PROVIDING LOGISTICS FOR P.K.K.
INSIDE TURKEY.
THAT IS WHY IT IS ALSO, AGAIN,
UNACCEPTABLE FOR TURKEY, THE
ACTIVITIES OF P.Y.D. AND Y.P.G.
IN THE REGION.
SO AS A STRATEGIC ALLIANCE, AND
AS PARTNER OF THE UNITED STATES
UNDER THE UMBRELLA OF NATO, WE
ARE FIGHTING AGAINST
INTERNATIONALLY ORGANIZED
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS,
INCLUDING DAESH, OR I.S.--
WHATEVER YOU CALL IT-- AND ALSO
P.Y.D. IS A BRANCH OF P.K.K.,
WHICH IS ONE OF THE MAJOR
THREATS TO TURKEY AS A TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION.
>> Sreenivasan: DEPUTY PRIME
MINISTER NUMAN KURTULMUS, THANK
YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> I THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WEEK,
CALIFORNIA GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN
SIGNED A LAW TIGHTENING
PENALTIES FOR WASTEFUL WATER
USE, SUCH AS HOSING DOWN
DRIVEWAYS AND OVER-WATERING
LAWNS.
CALIFORNIA'S FIVE-YEAR DROUGHT
HAS PROMPTED WATER CONSERVATION
MANDATES FOR RESIDENTS AND THE
STATE'S VAST AGRICULTURAL
SECTOR.
FOR TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE WANTED TO SEE THE TOLL OF THE
DROUGHT ON PUBLIC HEALTH.
SO, WE WENT TO ONE CITY WHERE
HUNDREDS OF WELLS AND WATER TAPS
RAN DRY FOR THREE YEARS.
>> Reporter: TOMAS GARCIA LIVES
ON A STRICT WATER BUDGET.
>> I GET ABOUT NINE OF THESE
CASES OF WATER, AND I'M TWO
CASES AND TWO GALLONS LEFT FOR
THE MONTH.
>> Reporter: IT'S HALFWAY
THROUGH THE MONTH, AND THIS IS
THE ONLY DRINKABLE WATER SOURCE
FOR GARCIA, HIS WIFE AND TWO
DAUGHTERS.
THEY ALSO RELY ON THIS 2,500
GALLON WATER TANK THAT SITS IN
FRONT OF THEIR HOME.
THIS WATER IS NOT DRINKABLE; THE
FAMILY CAUTIOUSLY USES IT FOR
WASHING DISHES, FLUSHING TOILETS
AND SHOWERING.
JUST OVER A YEAR AGO, IT USED TO
BE MUCH WORSE.
THE GARCIAS HAD NO RUNNING WATER
BECAUSE THE TULE RIVER HAD DRIED
UP AFTER YEARS OF DROUGHT.
IT HAD BEEN THE MAIN WATER
SOURCE FOR THE WELL UNDER THEIR
HOME, AND FOR MANY RESIDENTS OF
EAST PORTERVILLE, CALIFORNIA, A
COMMUNITY OF 7,000 PEOPLE
75 MILES SOUTHEAST OF FRESNO.
OF THE 1,800 HOMES IN THE
COMMUNITY, 500 HAD THEIR WELLS
DRY UP COMPLETELY.
>> WE WERE IN DESPERATE NEED FOR
WATER, YOU KNOW?
AND THEN, THE SOLUTIONS TO OUR
PROBLEM IS JUST TO HAVE A WAY TO
CARRY THE WATER TO OUR
PROPERTIES, YOU KNOW?
AND THE ONLY WAY I HAVE IS MY
PERSONAL VEHICLE, MY FAMILY
VEHICLE.
>> Reporter: HAULING WATER IS
ALL THAT GARCIA DID WITH HIS
FREE TIME.
HE WORKS AS A MANAGER AT AN AUTO
BODY SHOP, AND IT'S WHAT THE
GARCIA FAMILY DID INSTEAD OF
SATURDAY BRUNCH OR SUNDAY
CHURCH.
>> MY WIFE DISLOCATED HER
SHOULDER BECAUSE IT WAS A LOT
OF WORK, PUSHING THOSE LITTLE
FIVE GALLONS BUCKETS FROM INSIDE
THE VAN, HANDING IT TO ME, AND
ME DUMPING IN THOSE TANKS, YOU
KNOW.
AND THE STRESS TO COME HOME AND
THERE'S NO WATER ON MY PROPERTY,
MY FAMILY IN NEED, AND THEN
HEALTH PROBLEMS, YOU KNOW.
AND THEN, IT WAS VERY, VERY
DIFFICULT.
>> Reporter: THE STRESS HASN'T
HELPED GARCIA'S HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE AND DIABETES.
HE ALSO WORRIED THAT HIS
DAUGHTERS WOULD GET TEASED AT
SCHOOL BECAUSE PEOPLE ASSUMED
FAMILIES WITHOUT RUNNING WATER
DIDN'T SHOWER.
DAVID ROZELL IS THE PUBLIC
HEALTH EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
MANAGER FOR THE COUNTY.
HE SAYS AN ONGOING DROUGHT IS
NOT A TYPICAL EMERGENCY.
>> IN AN EARTHQUAKE OR
SOMETHING, YOU CAN TREAT THE
INJURIES, AND THEY WILL HEAL
OVER TIME AND GET BETTER.
WE'RE SEVERAL YEARS IN, AND THE
DISASTER IS STILL HAPPENING.
WE ARE NOT EVEN IN THE RECOVERY
PHASE YET.
>> Reporter: ROZELL CAN'T
DEFINITIVELY SAY WHAT THE HEALTH
PROBLEMS MIGHT BE BECAUSE THERE
HASN'T BEEN A LOT OF HEALTH DATA
COLLECTED RELATED TO THE WATER
SHORTAGE.
>> WE'RE COMING INTO NEW
TERRITORY HERE.
WE'RE NOT SURE THE FULL EXTENT
OF WHAT THIS IS GOING TO DO TO
THE COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: IN ORDER TO
DISCOVER THOSE HEALTH PROBLEMS,
THE STATE CONDUCTED ITS FIRST
SURVEY IN THREE OF THE DRIEST
COMMUNITIES, LIKE EAST
PORTERVILLE.
THE RESULTS WERE RELEASED THIS
SUMMER.
>> WE HAD HEARD ANECDOTAL
STORIES ABOUT THE TYPES OF
THINGS THAT THEY WERE DOING TO
CONSERVE WATER.
WHETHER IT WAS REDUCING THEIR
HAND WASHING, REDUCING THEIR
FOOD WASHING, WHETHER IT WAS
THEY HAD OBSERVED MORE DUST OR
FELT THAT THERE WAS... THE
COMMUNITY WAS LESS HEALTHY
BECAUSE OF THE DROUGHT.
BUT WE DIDN'T HAVE HARD AND FAST
INFORMATION THAT WE COULD USE
FOR THAT.
>> Reporter: THE SURVEY FOUND
THAT TWO-THIRDS OF EAST
PORTERVILLE RESIDENTS HAVE
REDUCED HOW MUCH THEY SHOWER,
WASH THEIR HANDS, WASH THEIR
FOOD OR FLUSH THEIR TOILETS.
ROZELL SAYS THESE HABITS WILL
LEAD TO MORE GASTROINTESTINAL
ILLNESSES.
RESIDENTS ALSO REPORTED THAT
DRIER CONDITIONS AND DUST HAVE
WORSENED CHRONIC HEALTH
CONDITIONS, ALLERGIES AND
ASTHMA.
THEN, THERE'S THE PSYCHOLOGICAL
TOLL.
>> THE DROUGHT HAD HAD SOME
NEGATIVE EFFECTS ON THEIR MENTAL
HEALTH AND THEIR PEACE OF MIND.
WE SAW ABOUT HALF THE HOUSEHOLDS
THAT WE INTERVIEWED TELL US THAT
THE DROUGHT HAD NEGATIVELY
AFFECTED THEIR PEACE OF MIND.
>> Reporter: TOMAS GARCIA KNOWS
ABOUT THAT.
>> I SPOKE TO DIFFERENT PEOPLE
JUST ONLY LAST WEEK.
AND THEN, THEY MENTION TO ME,
"YOU KNOW WHAT?
I WAS THINKING OF SUICIDE
MYSELF."
I SAID, "WHAT?"
I SAID, JUST BECAUSE THE STRESS
THEY GOES THROUGH.
THE MOST STRESSFUL DAYS,
SOMETIMES IT WAS WHEN I CAME IN
AROUND THIS TIME AND THEN
LOADING THE WATER AND TRANSFER
IT FROM ONE TANK TO ANOTHER AND
SIT ON MYSELF AND THINKING
ABOUT, "WHAT ARE I'M DOIN'
THIS," YOU KNOW.
GOING THROUGH THIS, IT IS THE
WORST.
>> WE DEFINITELY FEEL FRUSTRATED
WHEN WE SEE THE STRUGGLE THAT WE
SEE THE RESIDENTS GOING THROUGH.
>> Reporter: MELISSA WITHNELL IS
WITH C-SET, A LOCAL NONPROFIT
RUNNING EAST PORTERVILLE'S
DROUGHT RESOURCE CENTER.
>> THESE ARE THE MOBILE SHOWERS
THAT ARE AVAILABLE TO PEOPLE WHO
DO NOT HAVE RUNNING WATER IN
THEIR HOME.
>> Reporter: IT HAS SET UP
TEMPORARY SHOWERS STALLS,
BATHROOMS AND SINKS IN
THE PARKING LOT OF A LOCAL
CHURCH.
>> PEOPLE ARE PLAYING OUTSIDE,
PEOPLE ARE WORKING OUTSIDE.
WE HAVE A FARM LABOR COMMUNITY.
SO, YOU KNOW, IT BECOMES A MAJOR
ISSUE WHEN YOU JUST CANNOT GET
IN SOME WATER AND RINSE YOURSELF
OFF.
>> Reporter: THE CENTER ALSO
HANDS OUT STACKS OF BOTTLED
WATER.
BUT WHITNELL SAYS THIS SITE, AS
WELL AS THE WATER TANKS OR
STRESS COUNSELING SERVICES
PROVIDED BY THE COUNTY, ARE ONLY
INTERIM SOLUTIONS.
>> WE DEFINITELY ENCOUNTER, YOU
KNOW, MIXED FEELINGS BECAUSE
YOU'RE TRYING TO HELP PEOPLE BUT
THERE'S ONLY SUCH MUCH YOU CAN
DO UNTIL A LONG-TERM SOLUTION IS
ESTABLISHED.
AND SO, IT THEN BECOMES AN ISSUE
FOR THE COUNTY AND THE STATE TO
STEP IN SO THAT THIS DOESN'T
BECOME A PUBLIC HEALTH
EMERGENCY.
>> Reporter: FELICIA MARCUS IS
THE CHAIR OF THE STATE WATER
RESOURCES CONTROL BOARD.
>> GENERALLY, THIS IS A LOCAL
CONCERN, A COUNTY CONCERN IN
TRYING TO FIGURE IT OUT.
BUT I THINK THAT IN THE ENORMITY
OF A CRISIS OF THIS KIND,
EVERYBODY HAS TO COME TOGETHER
AND TRY TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO DO
IT.
>> Reporter: MARCUS RECOGNIZES
THAT HANDING OUT BOTTLED WATER
AND DROPPING WATER TANKS IN
FRONT OF HOMES ARE NOT PERMANENT
SOLUTIONS TO THE DROUGHT AND
GROWING PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERNS.
>> HAS IT TAKEN LONGER DURING
THIS DROUGHT TO GET IT ALL DONE
THAN I WOULD LIKE?
ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK ALL OF US WHO HAVE BEEN
WORKING ON IT WOULD'VE LIKED IT
TO HAVE BEEN DONE INSTANTLY.
BUT IN DEALING WITH REALITY, IT
TAKES WORKING WITH PEOPLE.
YOU HAVE PEOPLE WHO KEPT
THINKING, "WELL, IT'S GOING TO
RAIN THE NEXT YEAR, SO DO WE
REALLY HAVE TO GO THROUGH ALL OF
THIS?"
>> Reporter: MARCUS SAYS
PROGRESS HAS BEEN SLOW BECAUSE
WATER AGENCIES AT BOTH THE STATE
AND LOCAL LEVELS HAVE NEVER
COLLABORATED BEFORE ON AN
UNEXPECTEDLY LONG DROUGHT.
>> WE'VE HAD TO INVENT WHOLE NEW
WAYS OF DOING THINGS FOR THE
STATE AGENCIES TO BE ABLE TO
STEP IN TO USE THEIR LEGAL
AUTHORITIES AND OUR FUNDING
TOOLS TO BE ABLE TO COME
TOGETHER TO CREATE A SOLUTION
FOR THIS PARTICULAR COMMUNITY
AT A SCALE THAT WILL BE A LONGER
LASTING ANSWER THAT WILL HELP.
>> Reporter: AFTER NEARLY THREE
COMPLETELY DRY YEARS IN EAST
PORTERVILLE, STATE AND LOCAL
WATER AGENCIES POOLED TOGETHER
RESOURCES AND DREW UP A LONG-
TERM PLAN: CONNECT HOMES WITH
DRY WELLS TO THE WATER LINES OF
A NEIGHBORING CITY.
THE FIRST FEW HOMES TURNED ON
THEIR TAPS TWO WEEKS AGO.
THE GARCIA FAMILY IS SCHEDULED
TO BE HOOKED UP TO RUNNING WATER
BY THE END OF THE YEAR.
>> WATER IS SUPPOSED TO BE FOR
ALL.
AND THEN, ESPECIALLY, WE LIVE IN
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
THIS IS MOST POWERFUL COUNTRY,
AND WE HAVE THE RESOURCES TO
COME UP THE SOLUTIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SUNDAY, A FILMMAKER'S
DARING LOOK AT MEXICO'S DRUG
WAR.
>> ROOTING OUT THE STORIES OF
CORRUPTION BETWEEN PUBLIC
OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZED CRIME,
IT'S POTENTIALLY DEADLY WORK.
>> Sreenivasan: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND, SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, FACING
A POSSIBLE ELECTION
EMBARRASSMENT TOMORROW, GERMAN
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL SAID
TODAY SHE WOULD DO IT ALL AGAIN,
STAUNCHLY DEFENDING HER DECISION
TO ADMIT NEARLY A MILLION
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES LAST YEAR.
THE BACKLASH IS PROPELLING THE
ANTI-IMMIGRANT "ALTERNATIVE FOR
GERMANY" PARTY AGAINST MERKEL'S
CONSERVATIVE PARTY IN THE
LEGISLATIVE ELECTIONS IN HER
HOME STATE.
MERKEL SAYS OF HER OPEN BORDERS
POLICY, "IT WAS THE RIGHT THING
TO DO, THAT WE ROSE TO THIS
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSIBILITY."
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.